The Old Man And the Sea 

TO CHARLIE SCRIBNER 
AND 
TO MAX PERKINS 

The Old Man And the Sea 

He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf Stream and he had 
gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish. In the first forty days a boy had been 
with him. But after forty days without a fish the boy's parents had told him that the 
old man was now definitely and finally salao, which is the worst form of unlucky, and 
the boy had gone at their orders in another boat which caught three good fish the first 
week. It made the boy sad to see the old man come in each day with his skiff empty 
and he always went down to help him carry either the coiled lines or the gaff and 
harpoon and the sail that was furled around the mast. The sail was patched with flour 
sacks and, furled, it looked like the flag of permanent defeat. (Note: The skill of the introduction 
of the old man should be noted. He is both in time and timeless. The numbers mentioned are significant.) 

The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in the back of his neck. The 
brown blotches of the benevolent skin cancer the sun brings from its reflection on 
the tropic sea were on his cheeks. The blotches ran well down the sides of his face 
and his hands had the deep-creased scars from handling heavy fish on the cords. 
But none of these scars were fresh. They were as old as erosions in a fishless 
desert. 

Everything about him was old except his eyes and they were the same color as 
the sea and were cheerful and undefeated. 

"Santiago,” the boy said to him as they climbed the bank from where the skiff 
was hauled up. "I could go with you again. We've made some money. " 

The old man had taught the boy to fish and the boy loved him. 

"No,” the old man said. "You're with a lucky boat. Stay with them. " 

"But remember how you went eighty-seven days without fish and then we 
caught big ones every day for three weeks. " 

"I remember, "the old man said,"I know you did not leave me because you 
doubted. " 

"It was papa made me leave. I am a boy and I must obey him. " 

"I know," the old man said. "It is quite normal. " 

"He hasn't much faith. " 

"No," the old man said. "But we have. Haven't we?" 

"Yes," the boy said. "Can I offer you a beer on the Terrace and then we'll take 
the stuff home. " 

"Why not?" the old man said. "Between fishermen. " 


They sat on the Terrace and many of the fishermen made fun of the old man 
and he was not angry. Others, of the older fishermen, looked at him and were sad. 
But they did not show it and they spoke politely about the current and the depths 
they had drifted their lines at and the steady good weather and of what they had 
seen. The successful fishermen of that day were already in and had butchered their 
marlin out and carried them laid full across two planks, with two men staggering 
at the end of each plank, to the fish house where they waited for the ice truck to 
carry them to the market in Havana. Those who had caught sharks had taken them 
to the shark factory on the other side of the cove where they were hoisted on a 
block and tackle, their livers removed, their fins cut off and their hides skinned out 
and their flesh cut into strips for salting. 

When the wind was in the east a smell came across the harbor from the shark 
factory; but today there was only the faint edge of the odor because the wind had 
backed into the north and then dropped off and it was pleasant and sunny on the 
Terrace. 

"Santiago,” the boy said. 

"Yes, "the old man said. He was holding his glass and thinking of many years 
ago. 

"Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow?" 

" No. Go and play baseball. I can still row and Rogelio will throw the net. " 

" I would like to go. If I cannot fish with you, I would like to serve in some way." 

"You bought me a beer, "the old man said. "You are already a man. " 

"How old was I when you first took me in a boat?" 

"Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the fish in too green and he 
nearly tore the boat to pieces. Can you remember?" 

"I can remember the tail slapping and banging and the thwart breaking and the 
noise of the clubbing. I can remember you throwing me into the bow where the wet 
coiled lines were and feeling the whole boat shiver and the noise of you clubbing him 
like chopping a tree down and the sweet blood smell all over me. " 

"Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to you?" 

"I remember everything from when we first went together. " 

The old man looked at him with his sunburned, confident loving eyes. 

"If you were my boy I'd take you out and gamble,” he said. "But you are your 
father's and your mother's and you are in a lucky boat. " 

"May I get the sardines? I know where I can get four baits too. " 

"I have mine left from today. I put them in salt in the box. " 

"Let me get four fresh ones. " 

"One,” the old man said. His hope and his confidence had never gone. But now 
they were freshening as when the breeze rises. 

"Two,” the boy said. 

"Two,” the old man agreed. "You didn't steal them?" 

"I would, "the boy said. "But I bought these. " 'Thank you, 
” 
the old man said. He 
was too simple to wonder when he had attained humility. But he knew he had attained 
it and he knew it was not disgraceful and it carried no loss of true pride. 


"Tomorrow is going to be a good day with this current, "he said. 

"Where are you going? 
” 
the boy asked. 

"Far out to come in when the wind shifts. I want to be out before it is light. " 

"I'll try to get him to work far out, 
” 
the boy said. "Then if you hook something 
truly big we can come to your aid. " 

"He does not like to work too far out. " 

"No, "the boy said. "But I will see something that he cannot see such as a bird 
working and get him to come out after dolphin. " 

"Are his eyes that bad?" 

"He is almost blind. " 

"It is strange,” the old man said. "He never went turtle-ing. That is what kills the 
eyes. " 

"But you went turtle-ing for years off the Mosquito Coast and your eyes are good. 

"I am a strange old man. " 

"But are you strong enough now for a truly big fish?" 

"I think so. And there are many tricks. " 

"Let us take the stuff home, "the boy said. "So I can get the cast net and go after 
the sardines. " 

They picked up the gear from the boat. The old man carried the mast on his 
shoulder and the boy carried the wooden box with the coiled, hard-braided brown 
lines, the gaff and the harpoon with its shaft. The box with the baits was under the 
stern of the skiff along with the club that was used to subdue the big fish when they 
were brought alongside. No one would steal from the old man but it was better to take 
the sail and the heavy lines home as the dew was bad for them and, though he was 
quite sure no local people would steal from him, the old man thought that a gaff and a 
harpoon were needless temptations to leave in a boat. 

They walked up the road together to the old man's shack and went in through its 
open door. The old man leaned the mast with its wrapped sail against the wall and the 
boy put the box and the other gear beside it. The mast was nearly as long as the one 
room of the shack. The shack was made of the tough bud-shields of the royal palm 
which are called guano and in it there was a bed, a table, one chair, and a place on the 
dirt floor to cook with charcoal. On the brown walls of the flattened, overlapping 
leaves of the sturdy fibered guano there was a picture in color of the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus and another of the Virgin of Cobre. These were relics of his wife. Once there 
had been a tinted photograph of his wife on the wall but he had taken it down because 
it made him too lonely to see it and it was on the shelf in the corner under his clean 
shirt. (the royal palm: a tall, graceful palm of southern Florida and Cuba.) 

"What do you have to eat? " the boy asked. 

"A pot of yellow rice with fish. Do you want some?" 

"No, I will eat at home. Do you want me to make the fire?" 

"No. I will make it later on. Or I may eat the rice cold. " 

"May I take the cast net?" 

"Of course. " 

There was no cast net and the boy remembered when they had sold it. But they 


went through this fiction every day. There was no pot of yellow rice and fish and the 
boy knew this too. 

"Eighty-five is a lucky number, 
” 
the old man said. "How would you like to see 
me bring one in that dressed out over a thousand pounds?" 

"I'll get the cast net and go for sardines. Will you sit in the sun in the doorway?" 

"Yes. I have yesterday's paper and I will read the baseball. " 

The boy did not know whether yesterday's paper was a fiction too. But the old 
man brought it out from under the bed. 

"Perico gave it to me at the bodega, " he explained. (bodega: a grocery store.) 

"I'll be back when I have the sardines. I'll keep yours and mine together on ice 
and we can share them in the morning. When I come back you can tell me about the 
baseball. "(the baseball: The old man supports the Yankees of the American League.) 

"The Yankees cannot lose. " 

"But I fear the Indians of Cleveland. " 

"Have faith in the Yankees my son. Think of the great DiMaggio. " (the great 
DiMaggio: Joe DiMaggio, a fisherman’s son, outfielder with the Yankees from 1936 to 1951.) 

"I fear both the Tigers of Detroit and the Indians of Cleveland. 

"Be careful or you will fear even the Reds of Cincinnati and the White Sox of 
Chicago. " 

"You study it and tell me when I come back. " 

"Do you think we should buy a terminal of the lottery with an eighty-five? 
Tomorrow is the eighty-fifth day. "(a terminal of the lottery: Lottery tickets of various kinds are sold 
openly in the Caribbean. Perhaps the old man refers to the last two digits of a longer number.) 

"We can do that, 
” 
the boy said. "But what about the eighty-seven of your great 
record?" 

"It could not happen twice. Do you think you can find an eighty-five?" 

"I can order one. " 

"One sheet. That's two dollars and a half. Who can we borrow that from?" 

"That's easy. I can always borrow two dollars and a half. " 

"I think perhaps I can too. But I try not to borrow. First you borrow. Then you 
beg. " 

"Keep warm old man,” the boy said. "Remember we are in September. " 

"The month when the great fish come, 
” 
the old man said. "Anyone can be a 
fisherman in May. " 

"I go now for the sardines, "the boy said. 
When the boy came back the old man was asleep in the chair and the sun was 
down. The boy took the old army blanket off the bed and spread it over the back of 
the chair and over the old man's shoulders. They were strange shoulders, still 
powerful although very old, and the neck was still strong too and the creases did not 
show so much when the old man was asleep and his head fallen forward. His shirt had 
been patched so many times that it was like the sail and the patches were faded to 
many different shades by the sun. The old man's head was very old though and with 
his eyes closed there was no life in his face. The newspaper lay across his knees and 
the weight of his arm held it there in the evening breeze. He was barefooted. 


The boy left him there and when he came back the old man was still asleep. 

"Wake up old man, 
” 
the boy said and put his hand on one of the old man's knees. 

The old man opened his eyes and for a moment he was coming back from a long 
way away. Then he smiled. 

"What have you got? " he asked. 

"Supper,” said the boy. "We're going to have supper. " 

"I'm not very hungry. " 

"Come on and eat. You can't fish and not eat. " 

"I have, 
” 
the old man said getting up and taking the newspaper and folding it. 
Then he started to fold the blanket. 

"Keep the blanket around you, 
” 
the boy said. You'll not fish without eating while 
I'm alive. " 

“Then live a long time and take care of yourself, "the old man said. "What are we 
eating?" 

“Black beans and rice, fried bananas, and some stew. "(black beans and rice, fried bananas: 
staple foods of the Caribbean islands.) 

The boy had brought them in a two-decker metal container from the Terrace . The 
two sets of knives and forks and spoons were in his pocket with a paper - napkin 
wrapped around each set. 

"Who gave this to you?" 

"Martin. The owner. " 

"I must thank him. " 

" I thanked him already," the boy said. " You don't need to thank him. " 

"I'll give him the belly meat of a big fish, 
” 
the old man said . "' Has he done this 
for us more than once?" 

"I think so. " 

"I must give him something more than the belly meat then. He is very thoughtful 
for us. " 

"He sent two beers. " 

"I like the beer in cans best. " 

"I know. But this is in bottles, Hatuey beer, and I take back the bottles. " 

"That's very kind of you, 
” 
the old man said. "Should we eat?" 

"I've been asking you to, 
” 
the boy told him gently. "I have not wished to open the 
container until you were ready. " 

"I'm ready now, 
” 
the old man said. "I only needed time to wash. " 

Where did you wash? The boy thought. The village water supply was two streets 
down the road. I must have water here for him, the boy thought, and soap and a good 
towel. Why am I so thoughtless? I must get him another shirt and a jacket for the 
winter and some sort of shoes and another blanket. (the village water supply: a community tap or 
well.) 

"Your stew is excellent, "the old man said. 

"Tell me about the baseball, "The boy asked him. 

"In the American League it is the Yankees as I said, "the old man said happily. 

"They lost today, "the boy told him. 


"That means nothing. The great DiMaggio is himself again. " 

"They have other men on the team. " 

"Naturally. But he makes the difference. In the other league, between Brooklyn 
and Philadelphia I must take Brooklyn. But then I think of Dick Sisler and those great 
drives in the old park. "(the other league: the National League, to which the Brooklyn Dodgers and the 
Philadelphia Phillies belonged.)(Dick Sisler: player for Philadelphia from 1948 to 1951 and for other teams before 
and after these years(His father, George Sisler, was a well-known player for St.Louis and Boston.) 

"There was nothing ever like them. He hits the longtest ball I have ever seen. " 

"Do you remember when he used to come to the Terrace? I wanted to take him 
fishing but I was too timid to ask him. Then I asked you to ask him and you were too 
timid. " 

“I know. It was a great mistake. He might have gone with us. Then we would 
have that for all of our lives. " 

"I would like to take the great DiMaggio fishing, "the old man said. "They say his 
father was a fisherman. Maybe he was as poor as we are and would understand. " 

"The great Sisler's father was never poor and he, the father, was playing in the big 
leagues when he was my age. " 

"When I was your age I was before the mast on a square rigged ship that ran to 
Africa and I have seen lions on the beaches in the evening. " 

"I know. You told me. " 

"Should we talk about Africa or about baseball?" 

"Baseball I think, 
” 
the boy said. "Tell me about the great John J. McGraw. "He 
said Jota for J.(the great John J. McGraw: manager of the New York Giants from the early 1900 ’s to 1932.) 

"He used to come to the Terrace sometimes too in the older days. But he was 
rough and harsh-spoken and difficult when he was drinking. His mind was on horses 
as well as baseball. At least he carried lists of horses at all times in his pocket and 
frequently spoke the names of horses on the telephone. " 

" He was a great manager, " the boy said. " My father thinks he was the greatest. " 

"Because he came here the most times, 
” 
the old man said." If Durocher had 
continued to come here each year your father would think him the greatest 
manager."(Durocher: manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1940’s and of the New York Giants from 1948 
to 1955.) 

"Who is the greatest manager, really, Luque or Mike Gonzalez?"(Luque: Adolfo Luque, 
born in Havana in 1890, played until 1935 with Boston, Cincinnati, Brooklyn, and the New York Giants. Mike 
Gonzalez: manager of the St. Louis Cardinals, 1938, 1940.) 

"I think they are equal. " 

"And the best fisherman is you. " 

"No. I know others better. " 

"Que va," the boy said. "There are many good fishermen and some great ones. But 
there is only you. "(Que va: A Spanish exclamation difficult to translate----“What does it matter?”“What of 
it?”) 

"Thank you. You make me happy. I hope no fish will come along so great that he 
will prove us wrong. " 

"There is no such fish if you are still strong as you say. " 


"I may not be as strong as I think, "the old man said. "But I know many tricks and 
I have resolution. " 

"You ought to go to bed now so that you will be fresh in the morning. I will take 
the things back to the Terrace. " 

"Good night then. I will wake you in the morning. " 

"You're my alarm clock, 
” 
the boy said. 

"Age is my alarm clock, 
” 
the old man said. "Why do old men wake so early? Is it 
to have one longer day?" 

"I don't know,” the boy said. "All I know is that young boys sleep late and hard. " 

"I can remember it, "the old man said. "I'll waken you in time. " 

"I do not like for him to waken me. It is as though I were inferior. " 

"I know. " 

"Sleep well old man. " 

The boy went out. They had eaten with no light on the table and the old man took 
off his trousers and went to bed in the dark. He rolled his trousers up to make a pillow, 
putting the newspaper inside them. He rolled himself in the blanket and slept on the 
other old newspapers that covered the springs of the bed. 

He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of Africa when he was a boy and 
the long golden beaches and the white beaches, so white they hurt your eyes, and the 
high capes and the great brown mountains. He lived along that coast now every night 
and in his dreams he heard the surf roar and saw the native boats come riding through 
it. He smelled the tar and oakum of the deck as he slept and he smelled the smell of 
Africa that the land breeze brought at morning. 

Usually when he smelled the land breeze he woke up and dressed to go and wake 
the boy. But tonight the smell of the land breeze came very early and he knew it was 
too early in his dream and went on dreaming to see the white peaks of the Islands 
rising from the sea and then he dreamed of the different harbors and roadsteads of the 
Canary Islands. 

He no longer dreamed of storms, nor of women, nor of great occurrences, nor of 
great fish, nor fights, nor contests of strength, nor of his wife. He only dreamed of 
places now and of the lions on the beach. They played like young cats in the dusk and 
he loved them as he loved the boy. He never dreamed about the boy. He simply woke, 
looked out the open door at the moon and unrolled his trousers and put them on. He 
urinated outside the shack and then went up the road to wake the boy. He was 
shivering with the morning cold. But he knew he would shiver himself warm and that 
soon he would be rowing. 

The door of the house where the boy lived was unlocked and he opened it and 
walked in quietly with his bare feet. The boy was asleep on a cot in the first room and 
the old man could see him clearly with the light that came in from the dying moon. He 
took hold of one foot gently and held it until the boy woke and turned and looked at 
him. The old man nodded and the boy took his trousers from the chair by the bed and, 
sitting on the bed, pulled them on. 

The old man went out the door and the boy came after him. He was sleepy and 
the old man put his arms across his shoulders and said,” I am sorry. " 


"Que va. "The boy said. "It is what a man must do." 

They walked down the road to the old man's shack and all along the road, in the 
dark, barefoot men were moving, carrying the masts of their boats. 

When they reached the old man's shack the boy took the rolls of line in the basket 
and the harpoon and gaff and the old man carried the mast with the furled sail on his 
shoulder. 

"Do you want coffee?” the boy asked. 

"We'll put the gear in the boat and then get some. " 

They had coffee from condensed milk cans at an early morning place that served 
fishermen. 

"How did you sleep old man? 
” 
the boy asked. He was waking up now although it 
was still hard for him to leave his sleep. 

"Very well, Manolin," the old man said. "I feel confident today. " 

"So do I, 
” 
the boy said. "Now I must get your sardines and mine and your fresh 
baits. He brings our gear himself. He never wants anyone to carry anything. " 

"We're different, 
” 
the old man said. "I let you carry things when you were five 
years old. " 

"1 know it, 
” 
the boy said. "I'll be right back. Have another coffee. We have credit 
here. " 

He walked off, barefooted on the coral rocks, to the ice house where the baits 
were stored. 

The old man drank his coffee slowly. It was all he would have all day and he 
knew that he should take it. For a long time now eating had bored him and he never 
carried a lunch. He had a bottle of water in the bow of the skiff and that was all he 
needed for the day. 

The boy was back now with the sardines and the two baits wrapped in a 
newspaper and they went down the trail to the skiff, feeling the pebbled sand under 
their feet, and lifted the skiff and slid her into the water. 

"Good luck old man. " 

"Good luck, "the old man said. He fitted the rope lashings of the oars onto the 
thole pins and, leaning forward against the thrust of the blades in the water, he began 
to row out of the harbor in the dark. There were other boats from the other beaches 
going out to sea and the old man heard the dip and push of their oars even though he 
could not see them now the moon was below the hills. 
Sometimes someone would speak in a boat. But most of the boats were silent 
except for the dip of the oars. They spread apart after they were out of the mouth of 
the harbor and each one headed for the part of the ocean where he hoped to find fish. 
The old man knew he was going far out and he left the smell of the land behind and 
rowed out into the clean early morning smell of the ocean. He saw the 
phosphorescence of the Gulf weed in the water as he rowed over the part of the ocean 
that the fishermen called the great well because there was a sudden deep of seven 
hundred fathoms where all sorts of fish congregated because of the swirl the current 
made against the steep walls of the floor of the ocean. Here there were concentrations 
of shrimp and bait and sometimes schools of squid in the deepest holes and these rose 


close to the surface at night where all the wandering fish fed on them. 

In the dark the old man could feel the morning coming and as he rowed he heard 
the trembling sound as flying fish left the water and the hissing that their stiff set 
wings made as they soared away in the darkness. He was very fond of flying fish as 
they were his principal friends on the ocean. He was sorry for the birds, especially the 
small delicate dark terns that were always flying and looking and almost never finding, 
and he thought,” The birds have a harder life than we do except for the robber birds 
and the heavy strong ones. Why did they make birds so delicate and fine as those sea 
swallows when the ocean can be so cruel? She is kind and very beautiful. But she can 
be so cruel and it comes so suddenly and such birds that fly, dipping and hunting, with 
their small sad voices are made too delicately for the sea. " 

He always thought of the sea as la mar which is what people call her in Spanish 
when they love her. Sometimes those who love her say bad things of her but they are 
always said as though she were a woman. Some of the younger fishermen, those who 
used buoys as floats for their lines and had motorboats, bought when the shark livers 
had brought much money, spoke of her as el mar which is masculine. They spoke of 
her as a contestant or a place or even an enemy. But the old man always thought of 
her as feminine and as something that gave or withheld great favors, and if she did 
wild or wicked things it was because she could not help them. The moon affects her 
as it does a woman, he thought. 

He was rowing steadily and it was no effort for him since he kept well within his 
speed and the surface of the ocean was flat except for the occasional swirls of the 
current. He was letting the current do a third of the work and as it started to be light he 
saw he was already further out than he had hoped to be at this hour. 

I worked the deep wells for a week and did nothing, he thought. Today I'll work 
out where the schools of bonita and albacore are and maybe there will be a big one 
with them.(albacore: the long-finned tunny.) 

Before it was really light he had his baits out and was drifting with the current. 
One bait was down forty fathoms. The second was at seventy-five and the third and 
fourth were down in the blue water at one hundred and one hundred and twenty-five 
fathoms. Each bait hung head down with the shank of the hook inside the bait fish, 
tied and sewed solid and all the projecting part of the hook, the curve and the point, 
was covered with fresh sardines. Each sardine was hooked through both eyes so that 
they made a half-garland on the projecting steel. There was no part of the hook that a 
great fish could feel which was not sweet smelling and good tasting.(These pages provide a 
good example of Hemingway’s description from the point of view of the fisherman.) 

The boy had given him two fresh small tunas, or albacores, which hung on the 
two deepest lines like plummets and, on the others, he had a big blue runner and a 
yellow jack that had been used before; but they were in good condition still and had 
the excellent sardines to give them scent and attractiveness. Each line, as thick around 
as a big pencil, was looped onto a green-sapped stick so that any pull or touch on the 
bait would make the stick dip and each line had two forty-fathom coils which could 
be made fast to the other spare coils so that, if it were necessary, a fish could take out 
over three hundred fathoms of line. 


Now the man watched the dip of the three sticks over the side of the skiff and 
rowed gently to keep the lines straight up and down and at their proper depths. It was 
quite light and any moment now the sun would rise. 

The sun rose thinly from the sea and the old man could see the other boats, low 
on the water and well in toward the shore, spread out across the current. Then the sun 
was brighter and the glare came on the water and then, as it rose clear, the flat sea sent 
it back at his eyes so that it hurt sharply and he rowed without looking into it. He 
looked down into the water and watched the lines that went straight down into the 
dark of the water. He kept them straighter than anyone did, so that at each level in 
the darkness of the stream there would be a bait waiting exactly where he wished 
it to be for any fish that swam there. Others let them drift with the current and 
sometimes they were at sixty fathoms when the fishermen thought they were at a 
hundred. 

But, he thought, I keep them with precision. Only I have no luck any more. 
But who knows? Maybe today. Every day is a new day. It is better to be lucky. But 
I would rather be exact. (This is a favorite theme with Hemingway.) Then when luck comes 
you are ready. 

The sun was two hours higher now and it did not hurt his eyes so much to look 
into the east. There were only three boats in sight now and they showed very low 
and far inshore. 

All my life the early sun has hurt my eyes, he thought. Yet they are still good. 
In the evening I can look straight into it without getting the blackness. It has more 
force in the evening too. But in the morning it is painful. 

Just then he saw a man-of-war bird with his long black wings circling in the 
sky ahead of him. He made a quick drop, slanting down on his backswept wings, 
and then circled again.(man-of-war bird: a bird with a great wingspread, also called frigate bird, it roams 
the tropical seas, snatching fish and robbing smaller birds.) 

"He's got something, "the old man said aloud. 

"He's not just looking. " 

He rowed slowly and steadily toward where the bird was circling. He did not 
hurry and he kept his lines straight up and down. But he crowded the current a 
little so that he was still fishing correctly though faster than he would have fished 
if he was not trying to use the bird. 

The bird went higher in the air and circled again, his wings motionless. Then 
he dove suddenly and the old man saw flying fish spurt out of the water and sail 
desperately over the surface. 

"Dolphin," the old man said aloud. "Big dolphin. " 

He shipped his oars and brought a small line from under the bow. It had a wire 
leader and a medium-sized hook and he baited it with one of the sardines. He let it 
go over the side and then made it fast to a ring bolt in the stern. Then he baited 
another line and left it coiled in the shade of the bow. He went back to rowing and 
to watching the longwinged black bird who was working, now, low over the water. 

As he watched the bird dipped again slanting his wings for the dive and then 
swinging them wildly and ineffectually as he followed the flying fish. The old man 


could see the slight bulge in the water that the big dolphin raised as they followed 
the escaping fish. The dolphin were cutting through the water below the flight of the 
fish and would be in the water, driving at speed, when the fish dropped. It is a big 
school of dolphin, he thought. They are wide spread and the flying fish have little 
chance. The bird has no chance. The flying fish are too big for him and they go too 
fast. 

He watched the flying fish burst out again and again and the ineffectual 
movements of the bird. That school has gotten away from me, he thought. They are 
moving out too fast and too far. But perhaps I will pick up a stray and perhaps my big 
fish is around them. My big fish must be somewhere. 

The clouds over the land now rose like mountains and the coast was only a long 
green line with the gray blue hills behind it. The water was a dark blue now, so dark 
that it was almost purple. As he looked down into it he saw the red sifting of the 
plankton in the dark water and the strange light the sun made now. He watched his 
lines to see them go straight down out of sight into the water and he was happy to see 
so much plankton because it meant fish. The strange light the sun made in the water, 
now that the sun was higher, meant good weather and so did the shape of the clouds 
over the land. But the bird was almost out of sight now and nothing showed on the 
surface of the water but some patches of yellow, sun-bleached Sargasso weed and the 
purple, formalized, iridescent, gelatinous bladder of a Portuguese man-of-war floating 
close beside the boat. It turned on its side and then righted itself. It floated cheerfully 
as a bubble with its long deadly purple filaments trailing a yard behind it in the 
water.(Portuguese man-of-war: a type of jellyfish.) 

"Agua mala, "the man said. "You whore. " From where he swung lightly against 
his oars he looked down into the water and saw the tiny fish that were colored like the 
trailing filaments and swam between them and under the small shade the bubble made 
as it drifted. They were immune to its poison. But men were not and when some of 
the filaments would catch on a line and rest there slimy and purple while the old man 
was working a fish, he would have welts and sores on his arms and hands of the sort 
that poison ivy or poison oak can give. But these poisonings from the agua mala came 
quickly and struck like a whiplash.(agua mala: a fisherman’s exclamation; literally bad water.) 

The iridescent bubbles were beautiful. But they were the falsest thing in the sea 
and the old man loved' to see the big sea turtles eating them. The turtles saw them, 
approached them from the front, then shut their eyes so they were completely 
carapaced and ate them filaments and all. The old man loved to see the turtles eat 
them and he loved to walk on them on the beach after a storm and hear them pop 
when he stepped on them with the horny soles of his feet.(carapaced: protected by the hard 
upper shell.) 

He loved green turtles and hawks-bills with their elegance and speed and their 
great value and he had a friendly contempt for the huge, stupid loggerheads, yellow in 
their armor-plating, strange in their love-making, and happily eating the Portuguese 
men-of-war with their eyes shut. 

He had no mysticism about turtles although he had gone in turtle boats for many 
years. He was sorry for them all, even the great trunk backs that were as long as the 


skiff and weighed a ton. Most people are heartless about turtles because a turtle's heart 
will beat for hours after he has been cut up and butchered. But the old man thought, I 
have such a heart too and my feet and hands are like theirs. He ate the white eggs to 
give himself strength. He ate them all through May to be strong in September and 
October for the truly big fish. 

He also drank a cup of shark liver oil each day from the big drum in the shack 
where many of the fishermen kept their gear. It was there for all fishermen who 
wanted it. Most fishermen hated the taste. But it was no worse than getting up at the 
hours that they rose and it was very good against all colds and grippes and it was good 
for the eyes. 

Now the old man looked up and saw that the bird was circling again. 

"He's found fish,” he said aloud. No flying fish broke the surface and there was 
no scattering of bait fish. But as the old man watched, a small tuna rose in the air, 
turned and dropped head first into the water. The tuna shone silver in the sun and after 
he had dropped back into the water another and another rose and they were jumping 
in all directions, churning the water and leaping in long jumps after the bait. They 
were circling it and driving it. 

If they don't travel too fast I will get into them, the old man thought, and he 
watched the school working the water white and the bird now dropping and dipping 
into the bait fish that were forced to the surface in their panic. 

"The bird is a great help, 
” 
the old man said. Just then the stern line came taut 
under his foot, where he had kept a loop of the line, and he dropped his oars and felt 
the weight of the small tuna's shivering pull as he held the line firm and commenced 
to haul it in. The shivering increased as he pulled in and he could see the blue back of 
the fish in the water and the gold of his sides before he swung him over the side and 
into the boat. He lay in the stern in the sun, compact and bullet shaped, his big, 
unintelligent eyes staring as he thumped his life out against the planking of the boat 
with the quick shivering strokes of his neat, fast-moving tail. The old man hit him on 
the head for kindness and kicked him, his body still shuddering, under the shade of 
the stern. 

"Albacore, "he said aloud. "He'll make a beautiful bait. He'll weigh ten pounds. " 

He did not remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was by 
himself. He had sung when he was by himself in the old days and he had sung at night 
sometimes when he was alone steering on his watch in the smacks or in the turtle 
boats. He had probably started to talk aloud, when alone, when the boy had left. But 
he did not remember. When he and the boy fished together they usually spoke only 
when it was necessary. They talked at night or when they were stormbound by bad 
weather. It was considered a virtue not to talk unnecessarily at sea and the old man 
had always considered it so and respected it. But now he said his thoughts aloud many 
times since there was no one that they could annoy. 

"If the others heard me talking out loud they would think that I am crazy, "he said 
aloud. "But since I am not crazy, I do not care. And the rich have radios to talk to 
them in their boats and to bring them the baseball. " 

Now is no time to think of baseball, he thought. Now is the time to think of only 


one thing. That which I was born for. There might be a big one around that school, he 
thought. I picked up only a straggler from the albacore that were feeding. But they are 
working far out and fast. Everything that shows on the surface today travels very fast 
and to the northeast. Can that be the time of day? Or is it some sign of weather that I 
do not know? 

He could not see the green of the shore now but only the tops of the blue hills that 
showed white as though they were snow-capped and the clouds that looked like high 
snow mountains above them. The sea was very dark and the light made prisms in the 
water. The myriad flecks of the plankton were annnulled now by the high sun and it 
was only the great deep prisms m the blue water that the old man saw now with his 
lines going straight down into the water that was a mile deep. 

The tuna, the fishermen called all the fish of that species tuna and only 
distinguished among them by their proper names when they came to sell them or to 
trade them for baits, were down again. The sun was hot now and the old man felt it on 
the back of his neck and felt the sweat trickle down his back as he rowed. 

I could just drift, he thought, and sleep and put a bight of line around my toe to 
wake me. But today is eighty-five days and I should fish the day well. 

Just then, watching his lines, he saw one of the projecting green sticks dip 
sharply. 

"Yes,” he said. "Yes, 
” 
and shipped his oars without bumping the boat. He reached 
out for the line and held it softly between the thumb and forefinger of his right hand. 
He felt no strain nor weight and he held the line lightly. Then it came again. This time 
it was a tentative pull, not solid nor heavy, and he knew exactly what it was. One 
hundred fathoms down a marlin was eating the sardines that covered the point and the 
shank of the hook where the hand-forged hook projected from the head of the small 
tuna. 

The old man held the line delicately, and softly, with his left hand, unleashed it 
from the stick. Now he could let it run through his fingers without the fish feeling any 
tension. 

This far out, he must be huge in this month, he thought. Eat them, fish. Eat them. 
Please eat them. How fresh they are and you down there six hundred feet in that cold 
water in the dark. Make another turn in the dark and come back and eat them. 

He felt the light delicate pulling and then a harder pull when a sardine's head 
must have been more difficult to break from the hook. Then there was nothing. 

"Come on,” the old man said aloud. "Make another turn. Just smell them. Aren't 
they lovely? Eat them good now and then there is the tuna. Hard and cold and lovely. 
Don't be shy, fish. Eat them. " 

He waited with the line between his thumb and his finger, watching it and the 
other lines at the same time for the fish might have swum up or down. Then came the 
same delicate pulling touch again. 

"He'll take it,” the old man said aloud. "God help him to take it. " 

He did not take it though. He was gone and the old man felt nothing. 

"He can't have gone,” he said. "Christ knows he can’t have gone. He's making a 
turn. Maybe he has been hooked before and he remembers something of it." 


Then he felt the gentle touch on the line and he was happy. 

"It was only his turn, 
” 
he said. "He'll take it. " 

He was happy feeling the gentle pulling and then he felt something hard and 
unbelievably heavy. It was the weight of the fish and he let the line slip down, down, 
down, unrolling off the first of the two reserve coils. As it went down, slipping lightly 
through the old man's fingers, he still could feel the great weight, though the pressure 
of his thumb and finger were almost imperceptible. 

"What a fish,” he said. "He has it sideways in his mouth now and he is moving 
off with it. " 
